# Topological Spaces and Continuous Functions

### Define
A **topology** on a set $X$ is a collection $\mathcal{T}$ of subsets of $X$ having the following properties:

1. $\varnothing$ and $X$ are in $\mathcal{T}$.
2. The union of the elements of any subcollection of $\mathcal{T}$ is in 
$\mathcal{T}$.
3. The intersection of the elements of any finite subcollection of 
$\mathcal{T}$ is in $\mathcal{T}$.

### Define
Suppose $\mathcal{T}$ and $\mathcal{T'}$ are two topologies on a given set $X$. If $\mathcal{T'}\supset\mathcal{T}$, we say that $\mathcal{T'}$ is finer than $\mathcal{T}$; if $\mathcal{T'}$ *properly* contains $\mathcal{T}$, we say that $\mathcal{T'}$ is *strictly finer* than $\mathcal{T}$. We also say that $\mathcal{T}$ is *coarser* than $\mathcal{T'}$, or *strictly coarser*, in these two respective situations. We say that $\mathcal{T}$ is comparable with $\mathcal{T'}$ if either $\mathcal{T'}\supset\mathcal{T}$ or $\mathcal{T}\supset\mathcal{T'}$.

### Define
If $X$ is a set, a **basis** for a topology on $X$ is a collection $\mathcal{B}$ of subsets of $X$ (called **basis elements**) such that 

1. For each $x \in X$, there is at least one basis element $B$ containing $x$.
2. If $X$ belongs to the intersection of two basis elements $B_1$ and $B_2$, then there is a basis element $B_3$ containing $x$ such that $B_3 \subset B_1 \cap B_2$.

### Lemma 13.1
Let $X$ be a set; let $\mathcal{B}$ be a basis for topology $\mathcal{T}$ on $X$. Then $\mathcal{T}$ equals the set of all unions of elements of $\mathcal{B}$.

### Lemma 13.2
Let $X$ be a topological space. Suppose that $\mathcal{C}$ is a collection of open sets of $X$ such that for each open set $U$ of $X$ and each $x$ in $U$, there is an element $C$ of $\mathcal{C}$ such that $x \in C\subset U$. Then $\mathcal{C}$ is a basis for the topology of $X$.

### Lemma 13.3
Let $\mathcal{B}$ and $\mathcal{B'}$ be bases for the topologies $\mathcal{T}$ and $\mathcal{T'}$, respectively, on $X$. Then the following are equivalent 

1. $\mathcal{T'}$ is finer than $\mathcal{T}$
2. For each $x \in X$ and each basis element $B \in \mathcal{B}$ containing
$x$, there is a basis element $B'\in\mathcal{B'}$ such that $x\in B'\subset B$.

### Define
If $\mathcal{B}$ the collection of all open intervals in the real line, $$(a,b) = \{x | a \lt x \lt b \} $$ the topology generated by $\mathcal{B}$ is called the *standard topology* on the real line. Whenever we consider $\mathbb{R}$, we shall suppose it is given this topology unless we specifically state otherwise. If $\mathcal{B}'$ is the collection of all half-open intervals of the form $$ [a,b) = \{x | a\le x \lt b \} $$, the topology generated by $\mathcal{B}'$ is called the **lower limit topology** on $\mathbb{R}$ denoted $\mathbb{R}_\mathcal{l}$. Let $K$ denote all numbers of the form $1/n$, for $n\in\mathbb{Z}_+$, and let $\mathcal{B}''$ be the collection of all open intervals $(a,b)$, along with all sets of the form $(a,b)-K$. The topology generated by $\mathcal{B}''$ will be called the **K-topology** on $\mathbb{R}$ denoted by $\mathbb{R}_K$.

### Lemma 13.4
The topologies of $\mathbb{R}_\mathcal{l}$ and $\mathbb{R}_K$ are strictly finer than the standard topology on $\mathbb{R}$, but are not comparable with one another.

### Define
A **subbasis** $\mathcal{S}$ for a topology on $X$ is a collection of subsets of $X$ whose union equals $X$. The *topology generated by the subbasis $\mathcal{S}$ is defined to be the collection $\mathcal{T}$ of all unions of finite intersections of elements of $\mathcal{S}$. 

### Define
Let $X$ be a set with a simple order relation; assume $X$ has more than one element. Let $\mathcal{B}$ be the collection of all sets of the following types:

1. All open intervals $(a,b)$ in $X$.
2. All intervals of the form $[a_0, b)$, where $a_0$ is the smallest element (if any) of $X$.
3. All intervals of the form $(a, b_0]$, where $b_0$ is the largest element (if any) of $X$.

The collection $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis for a topology on $X$, which is called the **order topology**.

### Define
If $X$ is an ordered set, and $a$ is an element of $X$, there are four subsets of $X$ that are called **rays** determined by $a$. They are the following: $$ (a, +\infty) = \{x|x \gt a\} $$ $$ (-\infty, a) = \{x|x \lt a\} $$ $$ [a, +\infty) = \{x|x \ge a\} $$ $$ (-\infty, a] = \{x|x \le a\} $$

## Define
Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces. The **product topology** on $X \times Y$ is the topology having as basis the collection $\mathcal{B}$ of all sets of the form $U \times V$ where $U$ is an open subset of $X$ and $V$ is an open subset of $Y$.

### Theorem 15.1
If $\mathbb{B}$ is a basis for the topology of $X$ and $\mathcal{C}$ is a basis for the topology of $Y$, then the collection $\mathcal{D}=\{B \times C|B \in \mathcal{B} , C \in \mathcal{C} \}$ is a basis for the topology of $X \times Y$.

### Define
Let $\pi_x:X \times Y \to X$ be defined by the equation $\pi_x(x, y)=x$ and $\pi_y:X \times Y \to Y$ by $\pi_y(x,y)=y$. The maps $\pi_x$ and $\pi_y$ are called the **projections** of $X \times Y$ onto $X$ and $Y$ respectively.

### Theorem 15.2
The collection $\mathcal{S}=\{\pi^{-1}_x(U)|U \in \mathcal{T}_X \} \cup \{\pi^{-1}_y(V)|V \in \mathcal{T}_Y \}$ is a subbasis of the product topology on $X \times Y$.

## Define
Let $X$ be a topological space with topology $\mathcal{T}_X$. If $Y$ is a subset of $X$, the collection $\mathcal{T}_Y=\{Y \cap U|U \in \mathcal{T}_X \}$ is a topology on $Y$, called the **subspace topology**. With this topology, $Y$ is called a **subspace** of $X$; its open sets consist of all intersections of open sets of $X$ with $Y$.

### Lemma 16.1
If $\mathcal{B}_X$ is a basis for the topology of $X$ then the collection $\mathcal{B}_Y=\{ B \cap Y|B \in \mathcal{B}_X \}$ is a basis for the subspace topology on $Y$.

### Lemma 16.2
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. If $U$ is open in $Y$ and $Y$ is open in $X$, then $U$ is open in $X$.

### Theorem 16.3
If $X$ is a subspace of $X$ and $B$ is a subspace of $Y$ , then the product topology on $A \times B$ is the same as the topology $A \times B$ inherits as a subspace of $X \times Y$.

### Theorem 16.4
Let $X$ be an ordered set in the order topology; let $Y$ be a subset of $X$ that is convex in $X$. Then the order topology on $Y$ is the same as the topology $Y$ inherits as a subspace of $X$.

## Define
A subset $A$ of a topological space $X$ is said to be **closed** if the set $X - A$ is open.

### Theorem 17.1
Let $X$ be a topological space. Then the following conditions hold.

1. $\varnothing$ and $X$ are closed.
2. Arbitrary intersections of closed sets are closed.
3. Finite unions of closed sets are closed.

### Theorem 17.2
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. Then a set $X$ is closed in $Y$ if and only if it equals the intersection of a closed set of $X$. with $Y$.

### Theorem 17.3
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. If $A$ is closed in $Y$ and $Y$ is closed in $X$, then $X$ is closed in $X$. 

### Define
Given a subset $A$ of a topological set $X$, the **interior** of $A$ is defined at the union of all open sets contained in $A$, and the **closure** of $A$ is defined as the intersection of all closed sets containing in $A$.

### Theorem 17.4
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$; let $A$ be a subset of $Y$; let $\bar A$ denote the closure of $A$ in $X$. Then the closure of $A$ in $Y$ equals $\bar A \cap Y$. 

### Theorem 17.5
Let $A$ be a subset of the topological space $X$.

1. Then $x \in A$ if and only if every open set $U$ containing $x$ intersects $A$.
2. Supposing the topology of $X$ is given by a basis, then $x\in \bar A$ if and only if every basis element $B$ containing $x$ intersects $A$.

### Define
$U$ is a **neighbourhood** of $x$ if $U$ is an open set containing $x$.

### Define
If $A$ is a subset of the topological space $X$ and if $x$ is a point of $X$, we say that $x$ is a **limit point** of $A$ if every neighbourhood of $x$ intersects $A$ in some point other than $x$ itself. 

### Theorem 17.6
Let $A$ be a subset of the topological space $X$; let $A'$ be the set of all limit points of $A$. Then $\bar A = A \cup A'$.

### Corollary 17.7
A subset of a topological space is closed if and only if contains all its limit points.

### Define
A topological space $X$ is called a **Hausdorff space** if for each pair $x_1,x_2$ of distinct points of $X$, there exist neighbourhoods $U_1,U_2$ of $x_1,x_2$, respectively, that are disjoint.

### Theorem 17.8
Every finite point set in a Hausdorff space $X$ is closed.

### Theorem 17.9
Let $X$ be a space satisfying the $T_1$ axiom; let $A$ be a subset of $X$. Then the point $x$ is a limit point of $A$ if and only if every neighbourhood of $x$ contains infinitely many points of $A$.

### Theorem 17.10
If $X$ is a Hausdorff space, then a sequence of points of $X$ converges to at most one point of $X$.

### Theorem 17.11
Every simply ordered set is a Hausdorff space in the order topology. The product of two Hausdorff spaces is a Hausdorff space. A subspace of Hausdorff space is a Hausdorff space.

### Define
Let $X$ and $Y$ be a topological spaces. A function $f:X\to Y$ is said to be **continuous** if for each open subset $V$ of $Y$, the set $f^{-1}(V)$ is an open subset of $X$.

### Theorem 18.1
Let $X$ and $Y$  be topological spaces; let $f:X\to Y$. Then the following are equivalent:

1. $f$ is continuous.
2. For every subset $A$ of $X$, on has $f(\bar A)\subset \overline{f(A)}$.
3. For every closed set $B$ of $Y$, the set $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$.
4. For each $x\in X$ and each neighbourhood $V$ of $f(x)$, there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $f(U)\subset V$.

### Define
Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces; let $f:X\to Y$ be a bijection. If both the function $f$ and the inverse function $f^{-1}:Y\to X$ are continuous, then $f$ is called a **homeomorphism**.

### Theorem 18.2
Let $X$, $Y$, and $Z$ be topological spaces.

1. (Constant function) If $f:X\to Y$ maps all of $X$ into the single point $y_0$ of $Y$, then $f$ is continuous. 
2. (Inclusion) If $A$ is a subspace of $X$, the inclusion function $j:A\to X$ is continuous.
3. (Composites) If $f:X \to Y$ and $g:Y\to Z$ are continuous, then the map $ g \circ f:X \to Z$ is continuous.
4. (Restricting the domain) If $f:X\to Y$ is continuous, and if $A$ is a subspace of $X$, then the restricted function $f|A:A\to Y$ is continuous.
5. (Restricting or expanding the range) Let $f:X\to Y$ is continuous if $Z$ is a subspace of $Y$ containing the image set $f(X)$, then the function $g:X\to Z$ obtained by restricting the range of $f$ is continuous. If $Z$ is a space having $Y$ as a subspace, then the function $h:X\to Z$ obtained by expanding the range of $f$ is continuous.
6. (Local formulation of continuity) The map$f:X\to Y$ is continuous if $X$ can be written as the union of open sets $U_\alpha$ such that $f|U_\alpha$ is continuous for each $\alpha$.

### Theorem 18.3 (The pasting lemma).
Let $X=A\cup B$, where $A$ and $B$ are closed in $X$. Let $f:A\to Y$ and $g:B\to Y$ be continuous. If $f(x)=g(x)$ for every $x\in A\cap B$, then $f$ and $g$ combine to give a continuous function $h:X\to Y$, defined by setting $h(x)=f(x)$ if $x\in A$, and $h(x)=g(x)$ if $x\in B$.

### Theorem 18.4 (maps into products).
Let $f:A\to X\times Y$ be given by the equation $f(a)=(f_x(a),f_y(a))$, Then $f$ is continuous if and only if the functions $f_x(a)=\pi_x(f(a))$ and $f_y(a)=\pi_y(f(a))$ are continuous.
